May 18, 1983

  National Summary This summary is organized around the answers to four key questions  about current levels of construction activity.  1. How robust is the current upturn in housing sales and  construction?  2. How serious is the current downturn in nonresidential  construction activity?  3. How sensitive would activity in the housing sector be to interest  rate changes of different magnitudes and directions?  4. What is the likelihood of bottlenecks and upward price pressures  in the construction supplies industries?  Housing Sales and Construction The recent upswing in housing is widespread geographically, with all  Districts reporting substantial improvements over the extremely  depressed levels of the first quarter of 1982. Moreover, a  moderately high rate of housing construction appears to be  sustainable at least through 1983. Cautious estimates by economists  in the construction supply industry indicate an annual rate of  housing starts of at least 1.5 million units, and the consensus  among forecasters centers on levels between 1.5 and 1.6 million.  The general feeling is that a marked pickup in the underlying demand  for houses has occurred, and it was not just January and February's  good weather that generated the remarkably high figures for those  months. Moreover, the bad weather in March was probably responsible  for that month's small drop in seasonally adjusted starts,  especially in the Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco Districts.  Most Districts reported that sales of low priced homes had picked up  especially rapidly and there is an apparent tendency toward  construction and sale of smaller houses. While the houses may be  smaller than ever, they are apparently still being equipped with a  full array of appliances. In some regions, Cleveland and  Philadelphia for example, sales of medium or luxury priced homes  have also picked up, but the performance of the middle and upper  markets has been spottier.  While all the Districts reported current improvement, the medium  term outlook is more mixed. St. Louis and Dallas have started off  very strong, but starts are expected to slow considerably by the end  of the year. New York and Boston report activity that is already  rivaling previous peaks and regional industry observers anticipate  continued growth. In the other Districts the current level of  activity falls well below previous peaks, and analysts are uncertain  as to what the rest of the year will bring.  Nor is there a nationwide pattern in builder confidence. San  Francisco reports speculative building in anticipation of healthy  sales later this year. In Richmond and Dallas contractors are only  completing already-sold homes, and Philadelphia reports a  substantial, but diminishing, inventory of unsold houses.  Construction of rental housing has also increased, but the strength  of the upswing varies from District to District in line with the  tightness of local markets. Rental markets are tight in New York and  Minneapolis; loose in Atlanta, Chicago and Dallas.  In general then, while there is little doubt that a strong recovery  in housing is underway, it is not at all certain that the rest of  1983 will continue as strong as the first quarter.  Nonresidential Construction The nonresidential construction sector remained generally strong  over the course of the last recession. Now, however, a slowdown is  beginning nationwide as large office projects are completed and  fewer new starts are planned. Vacancy rates have started to climb in  most reporting regions--exceeding five percent in most places and as  high as 8 percent in Chicago and 9 percent in Minneapolis.  Advertised rents for office space have not declined, but several  Districts report an increasing incidence of rent-reducing special  deals such as one year's free rent, extensive remodeling, and free  amenities. Under these conditions developers are taking a "wait and  see" attitude about future construction plans. vacancy rates will  have to decline and effective rents will have to increase before  office construction starts begin to increase again.  The Districts differ in the expected duration of the slowdown in  commercial starts. Indeed activity has just started to pick up in  Florida and in some of the smaller Texas cities. Industry analysts  in New York expect 1984 to be a good year, and new projects are  being talked about actively in Boston and St. Louis. By contrast,  observers in Minneapolis fear that it will be three to five years  before commercial construction activity begins to pick up in that  District.  None of the Districts reported large amounts of new retail  construction. Work on smaller shopping malls can be expected to  begin later this year, about six months after the increase in  housing construction activity. Only Kansas City reported current  work on a large shopping mall, and an analyst of large regional  retail centers does not expect any such projects to be started this  year across the nation.  Sensitivity to Interest Rates It is generally agreed that the decline in mortgage rates is the  single most important factor behind the increase in housing  activity. Indeed, most respondents tended to feel that a further  increase in housing sales could still happen even without any  additional decline in rates. The basic question, however, appears to  be whether another large drop in conventional, fixed rate, 30 year  mortgage interest rates--to 10.5 or 11 percent--would bring out a  great many more potential buyers. Observers in Boston, Philadelphia,  Atlanta and Minneapolis believe that lower rates would touch off  something like a boom in housing sales. Analysts in Chicago and  Dallas are more dubious on this point.  The use of variable rate mortgages, which might reduce the  sensitivity of housing activity to interest rate fluctuations, does  not appear to be gaining in consumer acceptance. District reports  that discussed this issue indicated that the practice of "creative"  financing had diminished markedly with the drop in rates. The  conventional 30 year fixed rate mortgage remains, by far, the most  popular home finance instrument.  The general optimism about the sustainability of a healthy market  appears to be based on a widespread belief that interest rates will  not increase. Several Districts report the fear that any increase in  mortgage interest rates, of say fifty basis points or more, could  dampen recent growth rates. Market analysts in the New York region,  however, believe that activity could be sustained, even given a  small interest rate increase--especially if this were taken as a  sign that mortgage costs had "bottomed out" and would be increasing  further in the future.  Input Prices While there have been a few instances of temporary input shortages  (notably for lumber and dry wall) and some price rises, observers do  not expect any sustained pressure on construction costs through this  year. Construction supply industries are operating far below  capacity and are apparently capable of increasing production  quickly; so it is unlikely that anything more than temporary and  localized shortages will occur in the near future.  However, if mortgage interest rates do fall another percentage point  or more, and if, as some predict, this leads to an annual level of  housing starts closer to 1.8 than to 1.6 million, input bottlenecks  and upward price pressure could begin to become problems.
